*Q: Why should I donate blood?

A: Safe blood saves lives and improves health. Blood transfusion is needed for:

women with complications of pregnancy, such as ectopic pregnancies and haemorrhage before, during or after childbirth;
children with severe anaemia often resulting from malaria or malnutrition;
people with severe trauma following man-made and natural disasters; and
many complex medical and surgical procedures and cancer patients.

*Who can donate blood?
In most states, donors must be age 17 or older. Some states allow donation by 16-year-olds with a signed parental consent form. Donors must weigh at least 110 pounds and be in good health. Additional eligibility criteria apply.

*How often can I donate blood?
You must wait at least eight weeks (56 days) between donations of whole blood and 16 weeks (112 days) between Power Red donations. Platelet apheresis donors may give every 7 days up to 24 times per year. Regulations are different for those giving blood for themselves (autologous donors).


*Will it hurt when you insert the needle?
Only for a moment. Pinch the fleshy, soft underside of your arm. That pinch is similar to what you will feel when the needle is inserted.

*How long does a blood donation take?
The entire process takes about one hour and 15 minutes; the actual donation of a pint of whole blood unit takes eight to 10 minutes. However, the time varies slightly with each person depending on several factors including the donor’s health history and attendance at the blood drive.

*How long will it take to replenish the pint of blood I donate?
The plasma from your donation is replaced within about 24 hours. Red cells need about four to six weeks for complete replacement. That’s why at least eight weeks are required between whole blood donations.
*Why does the Red Cross ask so many personal questions when I give blood?
The highest priorities of the Red Cross are the safety of the blood supply and our blood donors. Some individuals may be at risk of transferring communicable disease through blood donation due to exposure via travel or other activities or may encounter problems with blood donation due to their health. We ask these questions to ensure that it is safe for patients to receive your blood and to ensure that it is safe for you to donate blood that day.

*What are platelets and how are they used?
Platelets are tiny, colorless, disc-shaped particles circulating in the blood, and they are essential for normal blood clotting. Platelets are critically important to the survival of many patients with clotting problems (aplastic anemia, leukemia) or cancer, and patients who will undergo organ transplants or major surgeries like heart bypass grafts. Platelets can only be stored for five days after being collected. Maintaining an adequate supply of this lifesaving, perishable product is an ongoing challenge.

*How often can I give platelets?
Every 7 days up to 24 apheresis donations can be made in a year. Some apheresis donations can generate two or three adult-sized platelet transfusion doses from one donation!

*Disadvantages
When performed in a clean manner, donating blood is safe.

If a blood bank were to reuse needles, this could increase the risk of someone experiencing a blood-borne infection.

For this reason, it is part of routine blood collection to use new needles for each donation and to require every person involved to wash their hands.

The United States Food and Drug Administration monitors blood banks to make sure they are collecting blood safely.

A person can experience some side effects, as a result of donating blood. These include:

dizziness
feeling faint
lightheadedness
nausea
These symptoms will usually go away within 3 days of giving blood.

If a person’s iron levels seem to be too low after a blood donation, they can increase their intake of iron-filled foods. Foods with high iron content include red meat, spinach, and iron-fortified juices and cereals.

*Refreshments

You will spend a few minutes enjoying refreshments to allow your body time to adjust to the slight decrease in fluid volume.
After 10-15 minutes you can then leave the donation site and continue with your normal daily activities.
Enjoy the feeling of accomplishment knowing that you have helped to save lives.
Your gift of blood may help up to three people. Donated red blood cells do not last forever. They have a shelf-life of up to 42 days. A healthy donor may donate every 56 days.

*What should I do after donating blood?
After you give blood:

Take the following precautions:

Drink an extra four glasses (eight ounces each) of non-alcoholic liquids.
Keep your bandage on and dry for the next five hours, and do not do heavy exercising or lifting.
If the needle site starts to bleed, raise your arm straight up and press on the site until the bleeding stops.
Because you could experience dizziness or loss of strength, use caution if you plan to do anything that could put you or others at risk of harm. For any hazardous occupation or hobby, follow applicable safety recommendations regarding your return to these activities following a blood donation.
Eat healthy meals and consider adding iron-rich foods to your regular diet, or discuss taking an iron supplement with your health care provider, to replace the iron lost with blood donation.
If you get a bruise:  Apply ice to the area intermittently for 10-15 minutes during the first 24 hours. Thereafter, apply warm, moist heat to the area intermittently for 10-15 minutes. A rainbow of colors may occur for about 10 days.
If you get dizzy or lightheaded:  Stop what you are doing, lie down, and raise your feet until the feeling passes and you feel well enough to safely resume activities.
And remember to enjoy the feeling of knowing you have helped save lives!
Schedule your next appointment.
